Let's now learn how to span grid items
across multiple grid cells
in order to occupy entire areas.
So suppose you wanted this violet element here
not only to occupy this single cell here,
but to span across these two cells here,
so occupying this entire area.
How we're to go about doing that.
And actually, it's really not hard.
So remember that we learned how
to use grid row and grid column.
Right?
So far we only placed grid items into single cells,
and so the end is always the beginning plus one.
Right?
So two and three in the columns also
from two to number three.
So only one column and here only one row.
But what if we put a higher number here
like a number four here?
Well, if we did that,
then the element would simply occupy more space.
So let's actually do that here with the number one,
which is this orange here.
And so let's say that we wanted to start
at column number two and end at column number four.
So what happens then is this.
So here we go.
Now it occupies both of these cells spanning
all the way from line number two to line number four.
Now what about this grid item that was here before?
Well, it simply moved down here,
because that's what the CSS grid algorithm does.
So if we have more items than we actually define cells here,
then CSS grid will automatically
add a new row or a new column,
but in this case, just a new row.
And this part here is then called an implicit grid.
Okay?
But that's something to talk about later,
because I don't wanna confuse you.
Okay?
So for now just note that if we span these items here,
and we end up with more items than we have space,
then we will simply be created a new line.
Okay?
But let's put this back to three as we had it before,
and then do this with the violet one
as we were saying in the beginning.
So, all we have to do is to say grid column.
And remember we wanted to go from here
spanning these two cells.
So very easy one three.
And where did it go?
Well actually it moved down here.
And can you guess why?
Well it's because we also placed this element
explicitly here in this cell.
Right?
So the item number one, the orange here,
is placed exactly here.
And so if we want to put this one here in the same place,
then this item here will try to find a new place.
Okay?
Unless we explicitly tell it to stay in this exact row
where we wanted it to be.
So let's also say grid row and say two three.
And so now, you see that it moved here where it was before.
And what happened now to the orange one?
Well, it simply got hidden behind this one here.
So what this means is that we can actually
have multiple grid items in the same cell.
So right now we have the orange one here in this cell,
so here behind the violet one.
And then we have the violet one on top of all of this,
occupying these two cells.
Okay?
And this is something really important to remember.
So we can always have multiple grid items in the same cell.
Now if you wanted this orange one here
to be on top and to be visible,
all we have to do is to set its Z index to some value,
like let's say 10.
And then you will see it move on top.
Okay?
So very simple.
And this is actually a technique that
is used quite a lot with CSS grids,
like for image galleries or stuff like that
where we can have elements overlying each other
to create some great effects like this.
Okay?
Now of course, we can do the same with rows.
So let's come here to element number five.
And instead of ending here at row line number two,
let's make it end on row line number three,
so right here.
And alright.
So you see here now that it spans these two grid cells here.
Right?
So that's one way of spanning elements
across multiple cells,
but there's actually another way.
And so let me demonstrate that one to you as well.
And I'm gonna do that with this one here,
with the green one.
So number two.
And actually, this is not even positioned at all.
So that's perfect to show you how it works.
So we can simply say grid column again.
And so suppose that we wanted to be from here to here.
So we could say of course one and three like we did before,
and that would do the job.
(mumbles)
So it moved down here now again
because of the same reason that we had before,
because this one here is placed
explicitly here at this point.
Right?
So you see here we placed it right here,
and so this element then moved down here.
But right now,
that's not a problem just to explain it to you.
So instead of writing one and three here,
we can simply say that we want it to span across two.
And that will do the exact same thing.
And we can say three, of course.
And then what happens is that it's gonna
span across three grid cells,
so one, two, and three.
And that's what this three here means.
Okay?
Of course, we could also start to see where number two
and then span all the way until number two,
or actually all across two grid cells.
So starting from number two here across two grid cells.
Now maybe you noticed before when we
had the number three here,
you saw what happened.
So basically it created a new column here,
a column that is completely empty,
because we didn't define any width for it,
but it still tried to kind of create a new column there.
So that's not a good idea.
And so if we're not really sure what to put here,
there's actually still another way.
So number two here is what we wanted.
So to span across two,
but let's actually do it even in another way.
So grid column starting from number two.
Now let's pretend that we don't remember
how many columns we have.
All we know is that we want it to be all until the end.
And in order to represent the end,
all we have to do is to say minus one.
Okay, and that's it.
Now it goes from column line number two
all the way until the end.
And that's what this minus one here represents.
Okay?
So instead of hard coding here
how many cells we want to occupy,
we simply put minus one
and then goes all the way until the end.
Because suppose that we wanted to start it in number one.
And if we had span two here before.
So if we had this, then now we have to change it to three.
Right?
And if we changed our mind again
and wanted to be from two until the end,
then we would have to change both again.
But with minus one, that doesn't happen.
Okay?
So no matter what we put here,
we can put one and it goes until the end.
We can put two and it goes all the way until the end,
and even three.
So from three to four here.
Right?
So that is another very handy trick here with the minus one.
Okay?
So spanning, we used basically three different ways.
First, we simply defined the end number
of the row or the column line.
Then as a second way, we used the span keyword,
which is actually better.
And then finally as a third method,
whenever we want to span all the way
until the end of our grid,
we can simply use minus one.
And of course,
this not only works for columns but also for rows.
Alright?
Now right now here, this looks like a huge mess.
But don't worry about that.
Okay?
All I wanted to do here is to simply show you
is how we can span or grid items across multiple cells
in order to occupy entire areas like this.
Okay?
And I hope that came across to you
so that you really understood how all of this works,
the different tools that we have at our disposal.
So like using grid row start, row end,
column start, or column end,
or by using grid row and the grid column,
or even by using a grid area,
like we have somewhere down here.
Yeah, so here.
So that's all that matters here in this lecture,
that you really understood how we
use all of these properties to come up with the layouts
and the designs that we want.
Okay?
So don't worry about how it looks.
Just worry about what you just learned
hopefully in this lecture.
So again, I really encourage you to play around
with all of these properties that I just showed you,
maybe build your own small grid and some more items in it,
and try to come up with some creative ways of using spanning
like I just showed you here in this video.
Okay, and that's it actually for this example.
These were the very basics,
but of course once more,
there's a lot more to learn.
And so we will continue with this intersection
in the next video.